## Methods Used
For this project, I built a Dr.GRPO based RL pipeline - with an explicit Gradient Regularization implementation that has empirically been shown to outperform the implicit regularization incurred by the Kullback-Leibler Divergence through Reference Resets.

A quick clarification on terminology - Dr.GRPO here refers to (https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.20783), or "GRPO Done Right". The paper illustrates the innate bias present within the normalization terms presented in the original GRPO algorithm. Specifically, dividing by the response length incurs a bias favoring brevity in correct answers, and verbosity for wrong answers. This is because these normalization values are multiplied by the advantage - which is positive when the answer is correct, and negative when incorrect. The "penalty" for a wrong answer is reduced if the answer is longer, since the negative advantage gets divided by a larger number; conversely, for correct answers, a shorter response produces a greater reward. Furthermore, additional bias is accumulated when dividing by the standard deviation during the advantage calculation itself, which the paper referred to as "question-level difficulty bias". Questions with lower standard deviation (which might happen if the question is too easy - resulting in all correct answers within a group - or too hard, where all the answers are incorrect) are consequently given a larger parameter update, since they're being divided by a smaller value.

Gradient Regularization (https://arxiv.org/pdf/2602.18037) puts an emphasis on ensuring stability within gradient step updates during training. Rather than penalizing the weights directly (as is done via l1/l2 norms), gradient regularization instead work to push the weights to seek a *flatter* local minima within the loss landscape by penalizing larger gradients (which are observed in more spikey local minimas). This encourages generalization, and in the case for Proxy Reward settings (such as LLM-as-a-Judge), improves proxy rewards as well! 

## Motivation
I found this paper very interesting as the proposition that GR techniques improve generalizability by biasing "flat rewards" (and how these "flat rewards" consequently imply a robust policy) would prove to be very useful when training on domains requiring this ability to generalize. Furthermore, the paper claims that GR mitigates 'Reward Hacking' in these Proxy Reward settings. This combination of claims was what lead me to actually implement this paper, as I believe they would lead to *far* better performance on science based tasks. While deterministic regimes such as coding and math have strictly verifiable rewards that circumvent the need for LLM-as-a-Judge proxys, domains that rely on them greatly suffer from inaccurate proxy rewards, largely in part due to Reward Hacking (https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.08794, https://arxiv.org/pdf/2507.17849, https://arxiv.org/pdf/2409.12822). 

The paper itself focused primarily on 2 datasets - GSM8k and AlpacaFarm. The former, Grade School Math 8k, would not serve to establish GR's performance gains in Proxy Reward settings. On the other hand, AlpacaFarm focuses on learning from human feedback - which falls short in it's ability to measure GR's performance gains for generalizability (although, strictly speaking, *measuring* "generalizability" is a tall ask and an active area of research by it's own right... I will probably just resort to adverserial perturbations as a preliminary measure). 

## Problem Formulation
That prompted me to further investigate with my own experiments, specifically within the science domain ! I would have *liked* to have trained on the open-ended subset of the Dr. SCI dataset (https://arxiv.org/pdf/2602.08321) as that seems perfect for the task at hand. However, seeing as the dataset is yet to become public, I've pivoted to the 60k biology+chemistry+physics dataset released by CamelAI. It is not an MCQ based dataset, so by working through the long reasoning chains required for this difficult dataset, the trained models should hopefully demonstrate a relatively deeper understanding of these concepts. The trained model will then be compared with a  Reference-Reset based GRPO model and a baseline GRPO model (ablating the Gradient Regularization aspect) on the MMLU-Pro dataset. 
(**edit 3/15**: As of today, there *does* seem to be HuggingFace dataset repo that follows the Dr. SCI paper to generate+source the dataset themselves [https://huggingface.co/datasets/MiniByte-666/Dr.SCI] ! However, I had unfortunately already finished my training run by the time this was uploaded.. so the rest of my analysis is based on the CamelAI dataset.)


## Notes during Implementation
This project was an interesting start, I ended up going down several rabbit holes that I did not initially plan on. FSDP was sort of an afterthought - I had heard of it before, but I had never looked too deeply into it. When I started looking into actually conducting these training runs myself, it became apparent I needed some form of data parallelization to ensure I didn't blow my wallet on GPUs. It's interaction with PEFT methods utilizing quantization (QLORA), and the resulting required bnb config came as an interesting observation following my attempted training runs. I learned a lot from this project, both implementation related, and theory related as well !

If I may be perfectly candid, one thing that stood out to me during this process were the subtleties that went into the implementation of these systems that did **not** stand out when reading the papers themselves. Perhaps this is slightly indicative of my lack of exposure to implementation (which I am attempting to change :) My background in Machine Learning stemmed from naïve numpy implementations of Transformers and all the logic within the underlying layers during my MS. From there, upon joining the industry, I was quickly transitioned into a higher level, abstracted view involving just making calls to the LLM. I had always been obsessed with building from scratch, so I was blindsided by all the abstractions introduced by PyTorch to make my life a lot easier.

Of course, I knew that during training we introduced dropout layers to further regularize the weights and prevent overspecialization of neurons, and how we backprop the gradient from the final loss using chain rule. What was missing from those papers and lectures was that for evaluation during training, we would have to explicitly turn *off* dropout layers, or that PyTorch automatically calculates the gradients for **every** calculation performed to generate the loss - so we have to turn *off* this autograd in specific places during the flow of decoding (when sampling rollouts), or reshaping tensors to operate in required dimensions, or the n other minutiae related to actually implementing these systems.

Admittedly, it was slightly demoralizing when first starting the implementation process. I knew all the math behind it, why was it so hard just to figure out which of the n PyTorch functions should be used ? Initially, my ego bristled at the thought of using AI to even figure out what function to use; it felt like cheating. Eventually, I came to terms with it. If my goal was to learn how to build intricate systems, this was the best way. I resigned to using it as a supporting aide, and used it to double check implementations. 

For example, I had tried implementing the cross entropy loss myself (as I didn't know there was a PyTorch function for it ...) by taking the log softmax, and using the torch.gather function to isolate the log probs of the ground truth token. After verifying my code with AI, I found that while my implementation was technically sound, it possessed a major computational inefficiency ! It stemmed from me calling on `F.log_softmax(shift_logits, dim=-1)`, which I found out computes the log prob for **every** token in the vocab, thus materializing an enormous intermediate tensor of shape [batch_size, seq_len, vocab_size] in GPU memory. This was an inefficiency that the proposed solution, using `-F.cross_entropy`, completely avoids by using a fused CUDA kernel to compute the necessary normalization on the fly without storing the entire intermediate tensor in memory.

## Beginning Training
I wanted to approach the actual training part of this project in 2 steps. I am well aware that libraries such as trl exist for the sole purpose of optimizing every aspect of training runs. However, I felt like taking a hands-on approach would allow me to learn *even more* about what changes might be required to speed up training, and, more importantly, what *necessitates* these changes. For this reason, I opted to try running my training script bare-bones, built on just a custom PyTorch class; and then graduate to a custom instance of the trl GRPOTrainer class to hopefully smooth out all the wrinkles (inefficiencies) from my PyTorch implementation.

### PyTorch Implementation
I was **not** prepared for the rollercoaster that this first step alone would take me on. I chose Runpod as my Cloud provider of choice, and was quickly able to setup my environment and files + dataset for Qwen3-8B. That was, unfortunately, the extent of my smooth sailing experience. I was immediately hit with OOM galore - my *overly* optimistic initialization of group size=8, micro batch size=2, and max generation length=8192 was doomed from inception. It was like getting inspired by seeing somebody play DOOM on an ATM (no, really: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PW5ELKTivbE) and instead trying to run Warzone on it. I only wanted to fall to model quantization as a last resort, so I would be encouraged to learn what considerations are being implicitly handled in libraries like trl.

After much finicking, I finally was able to get through **1** whole step without an OOM error ! Sadly, it was all in vain, as the sacrifices I made to even get through 1 step posed several glaring red flags. Primarily, my group size had to drop to 2, with a max generation length of 2000. For the complex science questions I was training the model on, 2000 tokens barely scratched the surface for the amount of reasoning required by the model to produce a conclusive answer. I only observed truncated generations in the logs which seemed to validate my suspicion. Furthermore, a group size of 2 is only marginally better than PPO, in that it doesn't fully enable the model to explore the question space. Finally, I had to reduce my micro batch to 1, which doubled the computation time .. not exactly optimal. I realized after that I could have probably kept the group size the same in this setup, as the micro batches would accumulate, but that would take 4x longer..

Beyond hyperparameter tuning, I tried to take a few memory safety measures to stabilize my implementation further. I replaced my standard gradient pointer reassignment (using the `=` operator) with in-place copies (using `param.grad.copy_(current_grad)`) to reduce GPU memory fragmentation. Additionally, I implemented a memory cleaning routine by manually deleting generated rollouts and pre-perturbation gradients, along with explicit Python garbage collection and a CUDA cache flush to free up as much space as possible for the next training step. However, upon deeper inspection, I came to know that PyTorch actually handles all of this under the hood, and advises *against* manually calling `gc.collect() & empty_cache()`... so that was a bust.

While using in-place copies definitely helped, it was merely a drop in the ocean. I needed something a **lot** more aggressive to reduce my memory footprint & vRAM utilization. After looking around, I realized my AdamW optimizer was actually the one hogging all of the vRAM with it's use of 4 bytes for Momentum + Variance each; and since I was using mixed-precision training (to keep a copy of the FP32 master weights), another 4 bytes were used **per** parameter !

I knew that the reason optimizer states were stored in FP32 (and thus required so much memory) was because they accumulate tiny changes over millions of steps. If the Momentum were stored in 4-bit, it would very quickly lose the "memory" of previous steps - more precisely, the low-bit quantization would cause the resulting tiny values to underflow to 0. Thankfully, using an 8-bit optimizer like `torchao.optim.AdamW8bit` also only requires a fraction of the vRAM (compared to fp32), all while practically retaining the performance levels of 32-bit optimizer states( https://arxiv.org/pdf/2110.02861) ! If I were an LLM doing this write up, this is the point where I would bust out the phrase "smoking gun" haha.

The last bit of vRAM saving that I was able to eke out came from a slight throughput tradeoff - using activation checkpointing. This frees up a lot of the memory overhead that is accumulated by storing each intermediate activation during the forward pass, by simply throwing it away. These activations would then need to be re-computed during the backwards pass, which is where the performance tradeoff kicks in. For me, it was slightly more important to ensure thorough exploration through a larger group size, which is why I opted for it in the end.

### TRL Implementation
Having gone through all that, I finally decided to switch to a trl based implementation. This would also allow me to leverage vLLM during the rollout generation for it's *massive* boost to throughput via PagedAttention and the other kernel optimizations the library has under the hood. Thankfully, trl has an *extensive* args list, so I was even able to disable the scaled rewards as mentioned in the Dr. GRPO paper with a single parameter, rather than manually updating the compute_loss function.

This was, however, the point in the process where I made a pretty disastrous mistake. I monitored the logs for the first few steps, and confirmed that I wasn't facing any OOMs. Sleepy me decided this was good enough to leave running overnight while I caught some z's - crucially before I saw the initial logging metrics (which I had set to be every 10 steps). I woke up the next morning, pleasantly surprised and content with the fact that my run was still going and I hadn't faced any OOM errors overnight !

I was still under the impression that the training run went well, until I took a look into the training logs ... and much to my chagrin, I was faced with two catastrophic issues. My `grad_norm` was effectively zero, and my `frac_reward_zero_std` was an enormous 0.9 ! Furthermore, my `sampling/sampling_logp_difference/mean` value was non-zero, but it took me **way** longer to even find out why this was an issue, so more on this later.

The `frac_reward_zero_std` being so high, in my eyes, was part of the reason why my grad_norm was effectively zero. Since most of the responses had rewards with 0 standard deviation, the Advantage itself was directly impacted - as to compute the Adv, we subtract the mean of the group's rewards from each response's reward. Since 90% of the samples had the same reward, the mean would center around this value; and so subtracting this value from the reward would lead to a zeroing of the Advantage, and thus the entire loss function itself. Since the loss function has zeroed out, no gradients flow through, leading to a grad_norm of zero.

To combat this, I had to modify my reward function. Previously, I was using a simple 0, 0.5, 1.0 rubric setup, which, in retrospect, was obviously going to lead to issues with less dispersed rewards. I instead changed it to a range from 0.0 to 1.0, and added criteria with weighting - 0.5 for factual accuracy, 0.35 for conciseness, and 0.15 for formatting. Making this change saw my `frac_reward_zero_std` metric immediately plummet to 0. Also - for reference - I made use of gemini-2.5-flash-lite as the grader.

This change didn't make a dent on the `grad_norm`, unfortunately. I tried messing around with some of the hyperparameters directly controlling the gradient but to little avail. This revelation saw my slow descent into madness, as I struggled to pinpoint where in my perturbed loss calculation I was nuking my gradients. It wasn't until an embarrassingly long time later that I thought to do a quick sanity check - and try it with a regular GRPOTrainer instance instead. 

The result of my sanity check confused me even more, as the grad_norm **still** remained obstinately close to 0, which implied that my code (ostensibly) wasn't at fault... I had run out of things to point fingers at. The only fault I could conceive at this point was to do with vLLM - as I had opted to use it for it's massive boost to throughput. With my wallet bleeding bills, I ran a final test with vLLM disabled and prayed for something. Lo and behold, 25 minutes later (which is crazy in retrospect, the vLLM team cut this down to ~5 minutes) I see `'grad_norm': 0.75390625` in the metrics !

Having confirmed this, I immediately take to GitHub to see if any issues have been raised regarding this. In this one instance, I was beyond relieved in knowing my experience was not a unique one; and there existed some GitHub user facing a similar issue (https://github.com/huggingface/trl/issues/4159), wherein the logits returned by vLLM were not scaled when temperature != 1 (which is needed for GRPO to encourage exploration).

This lack of scaling gets further compounded in the next step - importance sampling - which is required when using vLLM in collocate mode (running the inference engine on the same GPUs where I am training). Because the vLLM engine can slightly lag behind the most recent policy (probably to prevent the constant communication overhead between steps), trl instead incorporates importance sampling to accommodate for this lag and adjust accordingly. 

The importance sampling term would be calculated using the new policy (after the gradient updates), and the old policy (the old/stale weights being used by the vLLM engine) - `pi_new / pi_old`. pi_new would be properly scaled as it is handled by trl, however, vLLM (as mentioned in the GitHub issue) does *not* scale the resulting pi_old logits when using a temperature value != 1, thus leading to the `sampling_logp_difference` exploding.

To reconcile this difference, I just pass in `vllm_importance_sampling_correction=False` to the generation configs. This removes the  importance sampling calculation of the vLLM/trl sync from the loss, however it causes it's own host of issues involving bias - as we're computing the loss of the new policy using log probabilities from the old policy. Seeing as how incorporating the logp temperature change would require making changes to the vLLM engine itself (as the fix suggested in the GitHub issue was not compatible with my trl+vllm versions), I opt to accept this slight bias, rationalizing that the model is synched frequently enough for the bias to not compound extraordinarily.

Following these changes, I was **finally** able to observe a stable logging metric ! Determined not to make the same (costly) mistake as last time, I watched the training process steadily over the next couple of hours. Once I was satisfied that I had covered all the possible scenarios I could think of, I left it to run over the next 48 hours. Overall, the entire process of training the GradReg implementation and the baseline GRPO + all of the intermediate troubleshooting took ~ 1.5 weeks, and ~800$ of compute on 2x H200-SXM's.